CuPy-Xarray post (#614)
xarray-contrib/xarray.dev: src/posts/cupy-tutorial/index.md

---
title: 'CuPy-Xarray: Xarray on GPUs!'
date: '2023-10-27'
authors:

>   - name: Negin Sobhani, Deepak Cherian, Max Jones
>     github: negin513, dcherian, maxrjones

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - name: Negin Sobhani
    github: negin513
 - name: Deepak Cherian
    github: dcherian
 - name: Max Jones
    github: maxrjones
```

summary: 'CuPy-Xarray is a Python library that leverages CuPy, a GPU array library, and Xarray, a library for multi-dimensional labeled array computations, to enable fast and efficient data processing on GPUs.'
---

## TLDR

The [CuPy-Xarray](https://github.com/xarray-contrib/cupy-xarray) collaboration brings GPU acceleration into Xarray workflows. Explore the new documentation and tutorials to leverage these capabilities for your data science needs. 🎉 🥳 🚀

## Background

### What is CuPy-Xarray?

> CuPy is a GPU-accelerated library for numerical computations. It’s like NumPy but runs on NVIDIA CUDA. Meanwhile, Xarray is an open-source Python library that simplifies working with labelled multi-dimensional arrays, such as in weather data, satellite images, and more. Xarray can wrap custom duck array objects (i.e. NumPy-like arrays) that follow specific protocols.

Reviewer 2: Add a link to CuPy - https://cupy.dev.
```suggestion
[CuPy](https://cupy.dev) is a GPU-accelerated library for numerical computations. It’s like NumPy but runs on NVIDIA CUDA devices. Meanwhile, Xarray is an open-source Python library that simplifies working with labelled multi-dimensional arrays, such as in weather data, satellite images, and more. Xarray can wrap custom duck array objects (i.e. NumPy-like arrays) that follow specific protocols.
```

## New Documentation and Tutorials

We have now created detailed documentation with examples to help you get started with CuPy-Xarray. Check it out at https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.

The new documentation offer the following sections:

1. Basics of CuPy: This section provides an introductions to CuPy and basics of GPU computing and data transfer between host and device.
2. Introduction to CuPy-Xarray : This section introduces the CuPy-Xarray library and how it handles Xarray DataArrays on GPUs.
3. Basic Computations with CuPy-Xarray: This section introduces, how to use CuPy-Xarray to perform basic computations on Xarray DataArrays. Next, it introduces the concepts of broadcasting and alignment.
4. High-level Computation with CuPy-Xarray: This section introduces, Applying high-level functions like groupby, resample, rolling, and apply_ufunc to xarray DataArray.
5. Custom Kernels with `apply_ufunc` : Here we will talk about how to write custom kernels for `apply_ufunc` and how to use `apply_ufunc` with `groupby` and `resample`.

> 6. A real world example: This section introduces, how to use CuPy-Xarray to accelerate a real world example. We will use the NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections (NEX-GDDP-CMIP6) to demonstrate how to use CuPy-Xarray to accelerate a real world example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. A real world example: This section introduces, how to use CuPy-Xarray to accelerate a real world example. We will use the NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections (NEX-GDDP-CMIP6) to demonstrate how to use CuPy-Xarray to speed-up computation on climate data variables.
```

> If you have any questions, encounter issues, or want to contribute, the community forums are a great place to start.

Reviewer 2: Link to the forum at https://discourse.pangeo.io?
```suggestion
If you have any questions, encounter issues, or want to contribute, the [community forum](https://discourse.pangeo.io) is a great place to start.
```

## Summary

CuPy-Xarray brings together the power of GPU acceleration with the versatility of Xarray. With the new documentation and tutorials, users can quickly adapt to this integration and optimize their data science workflows.🚀

## Acknowledgments

A special thanks to the Xarray, CuPy, and Pangeo communities for making this integration possible. Collaborations like these are a testament to the power of open-source and community-driven development. 💪

## Appendix I: Installation Instructions

From anaconda:

```shell
conda install cupy-xarray -c conda-forge
```

From PyPI:

```shell
pip install cupy-xarray
```

## Appendix II: Additional Resources

[CuPy User Guide](https://docs.cupy.dev/en/stable/user_guide/index.html)
[Xarray User Guide](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/user-guide/index.html)

> [Cupy-Xarray Github](https://github.com/xarray-contrib/cupy-xarray.git)

Reviewer 2: Add your SciPy 2023 tutorial at https://negin513.github.io/cupy-xarray-tutorials?
```suggestion
[Cupy-Xarray Github](https://github.com/xarray-contrib/cupy-xarray.git)
[Xarray with GPUs tutorial](https://negin513.github.io/cupy-xarray-tutorials)
```

Author: @weiji14 I completely forgot about it. 😆  Thanks for your suggestions. Added! 

![image](https://github.com/xarray-contrib/xarray.dev/assets/17344536/049c5bfe-813a-474f-b6ad-abcd797ee831)

---
title: 'CuPy-Xarray: Xarray on GPUs!'
date: '2023-10-27'
authors:

>   - name: Negin Sobhani
>     github: negin513
>  - name: Deepak Cherian
>    github: dcherian
>  - name: Max Jones
>    github: maxrjones

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - name: Negin Sobhani
    github: negin513
  - name: Deepak Cherian
    github: dcherian
  - name: Max Jones
    github: maxrjones
```

summary: 'CuPy-Xarray is a Python library that leverages CuPy, a GPU array library, and Xarray, a library for multi-dimensional labeled array computations, to enable fast and efficient data processing on GPUs.'
---

## TLDR

> The [CuPy-Xarray](https://github.com/xarray-contrib/cupy-xarray) collaboration brings GPU acceleration into Xarray workflows. Explore the [new documentation](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/) and tutorials to explore how CuPy-Xarray enables GPU accelerations on large multidimensional datasets. 🎉 🥳 🚀

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The [CuPy-Xarray](https://github.com/xarray-contrib/cupy-xarray) project makes mixing GPU acceleration with Xarray workflows very convenient! Explore the [new documentation](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/) and tutorials to explore how CuPy-Xarray enables GPU accelerations on large multidimensional datasets. 🎉 🥳 🚀
```

## Background

### What is CuPy-Xarray?

> [CuPy](https://cupy.dev) is a GPU-accelerated library for numerical computations. It’s like NumPy but runs on NVIDIA CUDA devices. Meanwhile, Xarray is an open-source Python library that simplifies working with labelled multi-dimensional arrays, such as in weather data, satellite images, and more. Xarray can wrap custom duck array objects (i.e. NumPy-like arrays) that follow specific protocols.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[CuPy](https://cupy.dev) is a GPU-accelerated library for numerical computations. CuPy provides a NumPy-like array object -- a duck array -- that follows various standard array protocols and executes computations on CUDA-capable devices. Xarray can [wrap duck array](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/user-guide/duckarrays.html) objects (i.e. NumPy-like arrays) that follow specific protocols.
```

> The CuPy-Xarray integration means that Xarray can now handle CuPy arrays, providing a seamless transition between CPU and GPU computations in your data pipeline.
> 
> > CuPy-Xarray provides an interface for using CuPy in Xarray, providing [accessors](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/stable/internals/extending-xarray.html) on the Xarray objects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Thus Xarray can handle CuPy arrays, and `cupy-xarray` provides a number of useful methods under the `xarray_object.cupy` namespace, allowing seamless transition between CPU and GPU computations in your data pipeline.
```

### Why is this important?

GPU acceleration is becoming increasingly important in scientific research, data analysis, and AI/ML techniques due to its ability to perform massively parallel computations. GPUs can greatly accelerate the processing of array datasets, allowing for faster analysis and modeling of large datasets. By leveraging the power of GPUs with tools such as CuPy and CuPy-Xarray, Xarray users can gain significant performance improvements and unlock new opportunities for scientific discovery.

> 

Reviewer 3: Talk about https://github.com/cupy/cupy/pull/7575 and https://github.com/cupy/cupy/pull/7811 too!

Author: Done. Thanks for your great comments.

## New Documentation and Tutorials

> We have recently created detailed documentation with examples to help users get started with CuPy-Xarray. Check it out at [this link](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We have recently created detailed documentation with examples to help users get started with CuPy-Xarray. Check it out at [this link](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
```

The new documentation offer the following topics:

1. **[Basics of CuPy](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/cupy-basics.html)** : This section provides an introductions to CuPy and basics of GPU computing and data transfer between host and device.
2. **[Introduction to CuPy-Xarray](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/introduction.html)** : This section introduces the CuPy-Xarray library and how it handles Xarray DataArrays on GPUs.

> 3. **[Basic Computations with CuPy-Xarray](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/basic-computations.html)** : This section introduces, how to use CuPy-Xarray to perform basic computations on Xarray DataArrays. Next, it introduces the concepts of broadcasting and alignment.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
3. **[Basic Computations with CuPy-Xarray](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/basic-computations.html)** : This section introduces how to use CuPy-Xarray to perform basic computations on Xarray DataArrays. Next, it introduces the concepts of broadcasting and alignment.
```

> 4. **[High-level Computation with CuPy-Xarray](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/basic-computations.html#)** : This section introduces, Applying high-level functions like groupby, resample, rolling, and apply_ufunc to xarray DataArray.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. **[High-level Computation with CuPy-Xarray](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/basic-computations.html#)** : This section introduces applying high-level functions like groupby, resample, rolling, and apply_ufunc to xarray DataArray.
```

> 1. **[Basics of CuPy](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/cupy-basics.html)** : This section provides an introductions to CuPy and basics of GPU computing and data transfer between host and device.
> 2. **[Introduction to CuPy-Xarray](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/introduction.html)** : This section introduces the CuPy-Xarray library and how it handles Xarray DataArrays on GPUs.
> 3. **[Basic Computations with CuPy-Xarray](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/basic-computations.html)** : This section introduces how to use CuPy-Xarray to perform basic computations on Xarray DataArrays. Next, it introduces the concepts of broadcasting and alignment.
> 4. **[High-level Computation with CuPy-Xarray](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/basic-computations.html#)** : This section introduces applying high-level functions like groupby, resample, rolling, and apply_ufunc to xarray DataArray.
> 5. **[Custom Kernels with `apply_ufunc`](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/apply-ufunc.html)** : Here we will talk about how to write custom kernels for `apply_ufunc` and how to use `apply_ufunc` with `groupby` and `resample`.
> 6. **[A real world example](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/real-example-1.html)** : This section introduces how to use CuPy-Xarray to accelerate a real world earth system model analysis workflow. In this demo, we used the NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections (NEX-GDDP-CMIP6) to demonstrate how to use CuPy-Xarray to speed-up computations on climate data variables.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **[Basics of CuPy](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/cupy-basics.html)** : An introduction to CuPy, basics of GPU computing, and data transfer between host and device.
2. **[Introduction to CuPy-Xarray](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/introduction.html)** 
3. **[Basic Computations with CuPy-Xarray](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/basic-computations.html)** 
4. **[High-level Computation with CuPy-Xarray](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/basic-computations.html#)** :Applying high-level functions like groupby, resample, rolling, and apply_ufunc to xarray DataArray.
5. **[Custom Kernels with `apply_ufunc`](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/apply-ufunc.html)** : Custom CUDA kernels for `apply_ufunc` and how to use `apply_ufunc` with `groupby` and `resample`.
6. **[A real world example](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/real-example-1.html)** : This section introduces how to use CuPy-Xarray to accelerate a real world earth system model analysis workflow. In this demo, we used the NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections (NEX-GDDP-CMIP6) to demonstrate how to use CuPy-Xarray to speed-up computations on climate data variables.
```

> 6. **[A real world example](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/real-example-1.html)** : This section introduces, how to use CuPy-Xarray to accelerate a real world earth system model analysis workflow. In this demo, we used the NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections (NEX-GDDP-CMIP6) to demonstrate how to use CuPy-Xarray to speed-up computations on climate data variables.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
6. **[A real world example](https://cupy-xarray.readthedocs.io/source/real-example-1.html)** : This section introduces how to use CuPy-Xarray to accelerate a real world earth system model analysis workflow. In this demo, we used the NASA Earth Exchange Global Daily Downscaled Projections (NEX-GDDP-CMIP6) to demonstrate how to use CuPy-Xarray to speed-up computations on climate data variables.
```

If you have any questions, encounter issues, or want to contribute, the [community forum](https://discourse.pangeo.io) is a great place to start.

## Summary

> CuPy-Xarray is a Python library that leverages CuPy, a GPU array library, and Xarray, a library for multi-dimensional labeled array computations, to enable fast and efficient data processing on GPUs. By combining the capabilities of CuPy and Xarray, CuPy-Xarray provides a convenient interface for performing accelerated computations and analysis on large multidimensional datasets. With the new documentation and tutorials, users can quickly adapt to this integration and optimize their data science workflows.🚀

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CuPy-Xarray is a Python library helps you use CuPy, a GPU array library, and Xarray, a library for multi-dimensional labeled array computations, to enable fast and friendly data processing on GPUs. With the new documentation and tutorials, users can quickly adapt to this integration and optimize their data science workflows.🚀
```

---
title: 'CuPy-Xarray: Xarray on GPUs!'

> date: '2023-10-27'

Reviewer 2: Update date before merging :innocent:
```suggestion
date: '2023-11-12'
```
